---
layout: post
title: "The Amorites and the Kassites"
date: 2026-06-27 01:00:00
categories: blog history
---
On the relationship between foreign rulers and local Mesopotamian culture in the second millenium BC.

The earliest known civilization, Sumer, emerged in the southern
alluvial plains of ancient Iraq during the fourth millenium BC. They
developed the earliest known writing system, cuneiform, and built the
earliest known city, Uruk. They spoke a language known as
Sumerian. Subsequently, in the third millenium BC, the region came
under the control of a different people, the Akkadians, who spoke
Akkadian. They founded what might be called the earliest known
empire. These two coexistent languages, Akkadian and Sumerian, came to
define Mesopotamian culture for millenia.

Some time later, after the collapse of Akkad, a new Sumerian power,
the so-called Third Dynasty of Ur, was ascendant. The Dynasty was
threatened from the west by the Amorites, nomadic people originating
in the Levant. The Sumerians looked down upon the Amorites,
considering them both less civilized and less developed than
themselves. Yet when Ur collapsed after internal problems were
compounded by an Elamite invasion, it was the Amorites who moved in
and established themselves in Iraq. While they maintained many of
their own customs, they also enthusiastically embraced existing
Sumerian culture. In Larsa, for instance, the royal family "cultivated
a pedantic, baroque Sumerian literary style at court". Sumerian
culture was a symbol of status, as the sons of wealthy men studied
Sumerian literature. And at Isin, kings proclaimed themselves the
legitimate successors of the Third Dynasty of Ur. Sumerian hymns were
sung in their honour, and they added the Isin kings to the list of
Sumerian and Akkadian kings.

Later, when Amorite rule collapsed and the Hittites invaded Babylon,
the Kassites, who (maybe) originated in the Zagros mountains of Iran,
stepped in. Once again, while they maintained their own language and
customs, they also maintained and even rejuvenated Sumerian
culture. In the words of Foster and Foster, they “took their
relationship to the indigenous Mesopotamian culture with the utmost
seriousness”. They maintained their own deities, for instance, while
simultaneously adopting local cults and restoring their
temples. Moreover, while the Kassite language had no written script,
they invested much scholarship into the by now long-dead Sumerian
language, and the Kassite court at Babylon patronised Akkadian
literature. At Babylon, a translation school attempted to produce
Akkadian versions of major Sumerian literary works.

We were intrigued by these two instances of significant political and
cultural change accompanied by significant attempts by the new rulers
to resurrect, adopt, and maintain ancient Sumerian and Akkadian
practices. (All this is from Foster & Foster's "Civilizations of
Ancient Iraq", a real page-turner!)
