---
layout: post
title: "What's a morse?"
date: 2026-06-21 01:00:00
categories: blog books
---
On [chapter XXIV](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/pseudodoxia/pseudo324.html) of Thomas Browne's [Pseudodoxia Epidemica](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/pseudodoxia/pseudodoxia.html).

In the mid-17th century, the charming English writer and physician
Thomas Browne assembled an encyclopedia of common misconceptions,
titled Pseudodoxia Epidemica. In chapter XXIV, he considers the
supposedly popular assertion that "all Animals of the Land, are in
their kind in the Sea." In other words, that every land animal has an
aquatic counterpart.

Browne admits that at least some animals exist in both terrestrial and
marine forms, citing (sea-)serpents as one example. Nevertheless he
contends that a great many animals are to be found either on the land
or in the sea, but not both. Camels, sheep, and "Molls" (moles) have
no counterpart in the ocean. Some animals, though they have no true
marine equals, have misleadingly named counterparts which "receive not
these appellations from a total similitude in figure, but any
concurrence in common accidents, in colour, condition or single
conformation."

Horses, for example, do not really resemble "that which is commonly
called a Sea-horse". The modern reader might immediately agree, thinking of the small, odd animals we call sea-horses today. However, it quickly becomes evident that Browne is talking about something quite different, as he claims that sea-horses, "in their common descriptions", do not exist. They are "but Grotesco deliniations which fill up empty spaces in Maps, and meer pictorial inventions, not any Physical shapes". The word "Sea-horse" is used here to refer to a particular kind of fantastical sea-monster. 

However, sea-horses do seem to have some basis in reality. Browne insists that "Sea-horse" is a
misnomer for what "is properly called a Morse". What is a
morse? As it turns out, this is an archaic word for a walrus. The word
walrus itself [may have
come](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walrus#Etymology) from the old
Norse *hrosshvalr*, i.e., horse-whale. 

As for the bony fish of the genus *Hippocampus*, which we associate with the name seahorse today, Browne
considers these a kind of insect. It is uncertain why. He also dismisses the hippopotamus
as more closely resembling a pig than a horse (a fair assessment). 

So much for seahorses. He makes some puzzling references to a marine
animal "which they termed a Lion" (a lionfish?), which "was but a kind
of Lobster", as well as "that which they called the Bear" though it
"was but one kind of Crab". We're really not sure what he meant by that.